---
layout: post
title: "Interactive Plotting"
date: 2017-11-23 12:57:13 -0400
comments: true
---

I've been getting familiar with `ggplot` in R for generating figures while
working on a PLDI submission. I spent a bit of time messing around with
styling and have grown increasingly disappointed that I can't include
interactive plots in PDF submissions :/. Fortunately, Web browsers are much
more featureful, and I'd like to incorporate some interactivity into my
technical posts moving forwards.

<br />

It works! Sort of...
===
First, I have a couple requirements I would like to satisfy.
- Figures should be generated from R code. I don't want to have to do data
processing in JavaScript.
- Graphs and figures should be responsive to user input, and offer the
ability to "dig in" to the results for more details.
- Interactive plots should work entirely client-side. I don't want to host a
server, or deploy to a third party.
- Developing interactive posts should integrate cleanly with my GitHub Pages
deployment process. Specifically, plots should be embeddable within Markdown
posts as inline HTML.

Here's what I've managed to get working so far. This page embeds a
[Plotly](https://plot.ly/) widget as a JavaScript data URL within an
`iframe`.

<iframe width="100%" height="600px" src="/plot"></iframe>

<br />

Some Future Ideas
===
This current approach is slooow. I'd like plots to load asyncrhonously
without blocking the page. Ideally, plots would load quick enough that
blocking is a non-issue. I think I can get this working better with some
JavaScript hacking on my own. The current solution is pretty naive, and
simply exports Plotly figures to JavaScript programs from R Studio. If anyone
has experience with this I'd love some help in optimizing the process/end
result!